रामसख: क्वापि दिने कामद भगवन् गतो भवान् विपिनम् ।
सूनुभिरपि गोपानां धेनुभिरभिसंवृतो लसद्वेष: ॥१॥
रामसख:	in Balaraama's company
क्वापि दिने	one day
कामद भगवन्	Thou the fulfiller of wishes, O Lord!
गत: भवान्	went Thee
विपिनम्	to the forest
सूनुभि:-अपि	with the sons,also
गोपानाम्	of the Gopas
धेनुभि:-अभिसंवृत:	(and) by the cows surrounded
लसत्-वेष:	in a bedecked attire
O Lord! Thou the fulfiller of wishes, one day in a bedecked attire, with Balaraama, went to the forest. The sons of the Gopas and the cows also surrounded and followed Thee.
सन्दर्शयन् बलाय स्वैरं वृन्दावनश्रियं विमलाम् ।
काण्डीरै: सह बालैर्भाण्डीरकमागमो वटं क्रीडन् ॥२॥
सन्दर्शयन्	showing around
बलाय स्वैरं	to Balaraama joyfully
वृन्दावन-श्रियं	the beauty of Vrindaavana
विमलाम्	(which was so) pure
काण्डीरै: सह	with sticks (carrying)
बालै:-	(with) the children (Thou reached)
भाण्डीरकम्-	(the tree named) Bhaandeeraka
आगम:	reached
वटं क्रीडन्	the tree, playing
Joyfully showing around the unspoilt pure beauty of Vrindaavana to Balaraama, accompanied by the cowherd boys, carrying a staff in a playful mood, Thou reached the banyan tree called Bhaandeeraka.
तावत्तावकनिधनस्पृहयालुर्गोपमूर्तिरदयालु: ।
दैत्य: प्रलम्बनामा प्रलम्बबाहुं भवन्तमापेदे ॥३॥
तावत्-	then
तावक-निधन-	Thy death
स्पृहयालु:-गोपमूर्ति:	desiring, in the disguise of a Gopa
अदयालु: दैत्य:	a pitiless demon
प्रलम्ब-नामा	Pralamba named
प्रलम्ब-बाहुं भवन्तम्-	the long armed Thee
आपेदे	approached
Then, the pitiless demon, approached Thee in the disguise of a Gopa, desiring to kill Thee, who are with long arms.
जानन्नप्यविजानन्निव तेन समं निबद्धसौहार्द: ।
वटनिकटे पटुपशुपव्याबद्धं द्वन्द्वयुद्धमारब्धा: ॥४॥
जानन्-अपि	knowing though
अविजानन्-इव	not knowing as though
तेन समं	with him
निबद्ध-सौहार्द:	cultivating friendship
वट-निकटे	near the banyan tree
पटु-पशुप-	by skilled cowherd boys
व्याबद्धं	formed
द्वन्द्व-युद्धम्-	wrestling
आरब्धा:	started (Thee)
In spite of knowing fully well of his intention, seemingly unaware of his designs, Thou cultivated friendship with him. Then near the banyan tree, arranging the game of wrestling with the cowherd boys who were skilled in that art, Thou started a duel.
गोपान् विभज्य तन्वन् सङ्घं बलभद्रकं भवत्कमपि ।
त्वद्बलभीरुं दैत्यं त्वद्बलगतमन्वमन्यथा भगवन् ॥५॥
गोपान् विभज्य	the cowherd boys dividing
तन्वन् सङ्घं	into two teams
बलभद्रकं	of Balaraama
भवत्कम्-अपि	and of Thee also
त्वत्-बल-भीरुं	Thy strength afraid of
दैत्यं	the demon
त्वद्-बल-गतम्-	in Thy team joining
अन्वमन्यथा	(Thou) agreed
भगवन्	O Lord!
O Lord! Thou divided the cowherd boys into two teams led by Balaraama and Thyself. The Asura was aware of Thy strength and being afraid wanted to join Thy team, to which Thou agreed.
कल्पितविजेतृवहने समरे परयूथगं स्वदयिततरम् ।
श्रीदामानमधत्था: पराजितो भक्तदासतां प्रथयन् ॥६॥
कल्पित-	as per rules (arranged)
विजेतृ-वहने	the victorious be carried
समरे परयूथगं	in the fight, by one of the other team
स्वदयिततरम्	very dear to Thee
श्रीदामानम्-	Shridaamaa
अधत्था: पराजित:	Thou carried, (Thou) being defeated
भक्त-दासतां	(Thou) as a servant of Thy devotees
प्रथयन्	establishing /demonstrating
As per the rules of the game, as was arranged, the victor is to be carried by the vanquished. Thou being defeated, Thou carried the very dear friend Shreedaamaa, there by demonstrating to the world that Thou are at the service of Thy devotees.
एवं बहुषु विभूमन् बालेषु वहत्सु वाह्यमानेषु ।
रामविजित: प्रलम्बो जहार तं दूरतो भवद्भीत्या ॥७॥
एवं बहुषु	thus in many
विभूमन्	O Infinite One!
बालेषु वहत्सु	when the children were carrying
वाह्यमानेषु	and were being carried
राम-विजित:	by Balaraama defeated
प्रलम्ब: जहार तं	Pralamba (the demon), took him
दूरत: भवत्-भीत्या	far away for Thy fear
Thus the many cowherd boys were carrying and were being carried. In the course, Pralamba was defeated by Balaraama and so he carried Balaraama far away from Thy sight out of fear of Thee.
त्वद्दूरं गमयन्तं तं दृष्ट्वा हलिनि विहितगरिमभरे ।
दैत्य: स्वरूपमागाद्यद्रूपात् स हि बलोऽपि चकितोऽभूत् ॥८॥
त्वत्-दूरं गमयन्तम्	from Thee far going
तं दृष्ट्वा हलिनि	seeing him when Balaraama
विहित-गरिम-भरे	took on increased weight
दैत्य: स्वरूपम्-	the demon to his own form
आगात्-यत्-रूपात्	went to by which form
स हि बल:-अपि	he indeed Balaraama also
चकित:-अभूत्	wonderstruck became
Balaraama saw that he was being carried far away, so he increased his weight by his divine power. The demon then took to his own real form, seeing which even Balaraam was wonderstruck.
उच्चतया दैत्यतनोस्त्वन्मुखमालोक्य दूरतो राम: ।
विगतभयो दृढमुष्ट्या भृशदुष्टं सपदि पिष्टवानेनम् ॥९॥
उच्चतया दैत्य-तनो:-	because of the height of the Asura's body
त्वत्-मुखम्-	Thy face
आलोक्य	seeing
दूरत: राम:	from a distance, Balaraam
विगत-भय:	overcoming the fear
दृढ-मुष्ट्या	by a fierce fist
भृश-दुष्टम् सपदि	the extremely wicked (him), quickly
पिष्ट्वान् एनम्	crushed him
The Asura's height was great and so being carried on his shoulder, Balaraam could see Thee from a distance. At Thy sight Balaraam shunned all fear and with a firm fist struck the demon and quickly crushed him to a pulp.
हत्वा दानववीरं प्राप्तं बलमालिलिङ्गिथ प्रेम्णा ।
तावन्मिलतोर्युवयो: शिरसि कृता पुष्पवृष्टिरमरगणै: ॥१०॥
हत्वा दानव-वीरं	killing the clever Asura
प्राप्तं बलम्-	returned Balaraam
आलिलिङ्गिथ	(Thou) embraced
प्रेम्णा तावत-	lovingly, at that time
मिलतो:-युवयो:	when Thou two were meeting
शिरसि कृता	on Thy heads was done
पुष्पवृष्टि:-	flower showering
अमर-गणै:	by the gods/ devas
Balaraama returned after killing the clever Asura and Thou embraced him lovingly. As Thou two were meeting the gods and devas showered flowers on Thy heads.
आलम्बो भुवनानां प्रालम्बं निधनमेवमारचयन् ।
कालं विहाय सद्यो लोलम्बरुचे हरे हरे: क्लेशान् ॥११॥
आलम्ब: भुवनानां	the support of the worlds
प्रालम्बं निधनम्-	Pralambaasura's killing
एवम्-आरचयन्	carrying out
कालं विहाय	without delay
सद्य:	quickly
लोलम्बरुचे	a black bee like splendorous
हरे	O Hari
हरे:	eradicate
क्लेशान्	my sufferings
O Hari! Thou who has the splendour of a black bee, who are the support of the worlds, Thou who carried out the destruction of Pralambaasura, without delay, quickly eradicate my sufferings.